Hi friends
In this video we are going to learn the adjacency
matrix of a graph
So a graph can be represented in many ways
And one such method is using adjacency matrix and
first will see the case of an undirected graph So
we have an undirected graph here and to construct the
adjacency matrix The first step is to count the
number of vertices and if you have n vertices then
construct n by n matrix
So we have five vertices here
So construct five by five metrics Just like this giving
the name of vertices in rows and columns and
that is our first step
And now to add values into this metrics so first
we have cell 00 that is row zero column zero
to add value to this cell
We check if there is an edge from 0 to
But in our graph we don't have such an edge
put a zero there
Next we have 01 So we check if the recent
edge from 0 to 1 and yes we have
And since this is an undirected graph we can say
we have an edge from 0 to 1 and 1
to 0 as
Well so add a one here and next We have
02 and the there ia an edge between zero and two so add
a one here also
And next we have zero three again
We have an edge between zero three so val
one is added in this cell and next zero four
and there is no edge between zero and four
So add a zero here and next we go to
the second row of the metrics and check if we
have an edge from 1 to 0
So we have an edge between one and zero
So add a one in the metrics and then we
do not have an edge from 1 to 1
So add a zero here and next
We have one two
So if you see and there is no edge between
one and two so add a zero here and next we
have 13 and the recent edge
So add one and next we have one four and there
is an edge between 14
So add one
And next we go to the third row and we
have an edge between two and zero
So add one here and next we have row two
column one and one other method is that for undirected
graphs
If you have value one for adjacency matrix of 12
then he will definitely have the same value one for
adjacency matrix of 21 as well
And similarly if you have zero for adjacency matrix
of 12 then you will have the same value
Zero for adjacency matrix of 21 So we will get
zero here since row one column 2 is 0 and next is
2 2 and there is no edge
So add zero here and then we have 23
And the recent edge so add one here and next
is two four and see there is no edge
So we add zero
So that's the third row next 30 there is
edge between three and zero
So add one here and then we have 31 and
the recent edge so add one again
And next is three two
And again add one
Since we have an edge between three and two and
next  33 and there is no edge so
add zero here and then we have three four and
again we have an edge here so add one
And next we have the final row and if you
see there is no edge between four and zero so
add zero here and then we have four one and
the recent edge between four and one
So add one and next is four two and there
is no edge between four and two so add zero and next
we have four three and the recent edge So add one
and finally we add zero for four four since there
is no edge
So that is the edge adjacency matrix of this undirected
graph
Now if we have this adjacency matrix and if
you want to know the number of vertices is in
the graph that will be equal to the number of
rows or columns and names of the vertices are the
names of the rows or columns
And if you want to know if there is an
edge between two vertices you can check that in that
adjacency matrix for an example
We want to know if there is an edge between
two and three
Then I can go to row two and column three
and I can find a one there which means I
have an edge between two and three
So that's all about
adjacency matrix of an undirected graph now let us
see the case of directed graphs
Here we can follow the same procedure but the only
difference is that you need to check the direction of
the edge
So again the first step is to find the number
of vertices which is five here so constructive five by
five metrics name the rows and columns by the names
of the vertices and first
We have 00 and there is no edge between zero
and zero
So add a zero there next is 01 and the
recent edge from 0 to 1
So add a one here
Next we had zero two and the recent edge
from 0 to 2
So add one and next is 03 and again the
recent edge from 0 to 3
So add one again and then we have zero four
and there is no edge from 0 to 4
So add a zero there and that is all from
Vertex zero
Now take vertex one
And from Vertex one there is no edge vertex zero
So add zero there that is if you see the
recent edge between one and zero
But it is directed from 0 to 1 and not
from 1 to 0 and direction really does matter here
So we add zero here and next vertex
two
There is no edge
So we add zero and vertex three and
four
There are edges from one
So add one in these columns and next we take
vertex two and check going edges and we have only
edged 23
So only that will be one and we get
202122 and two four equal to zero next we
Take vertex three and again check for outgoing edges
And there is only one edge from three which is
So we get row three column four equal to one
and every other column in this row will be equal
to zero
And finally we have vertex four and see there are
no outgoing edges you will get zero in all the columns of this row